Presentation During Issuance (#509)
openid/OpenID4VCI: openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.md

as described in [@!RFC6749].
The Authorization Server MUST ignore any unrecognized parameters.

### Pushed Authorization Request {#pushed-authorization-request}

Use of Pushed Authorization Requests is RECOMMENDED to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity of the request data and to avoid issues caused by large requests sizes.

Below is a non-normative example of a Pushed Authorization Request:

```
POST /par HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com

> Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

Reviewer: can you please open a separate issue on this so that we can fix it in another PR?

> Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

Reviewer 2: opened #551

&authorization_details=...
```

Below is a non-normative example of a response to a successful request:

```
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-cache, no-store

{

>   "request_uri": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",

Reviewer 3: `6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c` ♥️♥️♥️♥️

&authorization_details=...
```

Below is a non-normative example of a response to a successful request:

```
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-cache, no-store

> {
> "request_uri":
>   "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",
>   "expires_in": 60
> }

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{
  "request_uri": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",
  "expires_in": 60
}
```

&authorization_details=...
```

> If the request is successful, the  Authorization Server MUST respond with a 201 Created status code and the Location header field containing the URL of the Authorization Request URI.

Reviewer 5: text mentions `Location` header but missing in the example

Author: This was changed in the meantime.

!---
~~~ ascii-art
 +-----------+            +----------------------+     +-------------------+    +--------------------+
 |   Wallet  |            | Authorization Server |     | Credential Issuer |    | OpenID4VP Verifier |
 +-----------+            +----------------------+     +-------------------+    +--------------------+
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |----------------------------->|  (1) Interactive       |                           |
       |                              |      Authorization     |                           |
       |                              |      Request           |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |

>        |<-----------------------------|  (2) Request           |                           |
>        |                              |      Presentation      |                           |

Author: ```suggestion
       |<-----------------------------|  (2) Interactive       |                           |
       |                              |      Authorization     |                           |
       |                              |      Response          |                           |
```

          },
          "claims": [
              {"path": ["last_name"]},
              {"path": ["first_name"]}
          ]
        }
      ]
    },
    "nonce": "n-0S6_WzA2Mj"
  }
}
```

The Wallet MUST process the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter as defined in [@!OpenID4VP] to perform a Credential Presentation to the Authorization Server.

For the requested Presentation, the Issuer is acting as a Verifier to the Wallet.
The exact architecture and the deployment of the Issuer's OpenID4VP Verifier is out of scope of this specification.

In the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter, the `response_type` MUST be `vp_token` (defined in Section 8 of [@!OpenID4VP]).

The `response_mode` of the request MUST be `direct_post` (defined in Section 8.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]) or `direct_post.jwt` (defined in Section 8.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP]).
Following the definition of this response mode, the Wallet sends an HTTP POST request to the endpoint indicated by the `response_uri` parameter in the Authorization Request to either complete the presentation (sending the VP Token) or to indicate an error.

> In either case, the Verifier responds by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
The Verifier MUST respond to this message by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.

Note: Sending `redirect_uri` is defined as OPTIONAL in [@!OpenID4VP], but it is REQUIRED here.
```

       |                              |      Request           |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |<-----------------------------|  (2) Interactive       |                           |
       |                              |      Authorization     |                           |
       |                              |      Response          |                           |
       |                              |      (presentation     |                           |
       |                              |      request,          |                           |
       |                              |      auth_session)     |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->|  (3) OpenID4VP direct_post to Response URI
       |                              |                        |                           |

>        |<----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|  (4) (redirect_uri)

Reviewer 6: Are we assuming this redirect is to be treated opaquely here e.g the wallet shouldn't add any request parameters etc to it?

Author: Added a note to say this in the text.

Note: In case a Wallet Attestation is required by the Authorization Server, it has to be included in this request.

## Interactive Authorization Response

Upon receiving an Interactive Authorization Request, the Authorization Server determines whether the authorization request is semantically correct and valid, and whether the information provided by the Wallet so far is sufficient to grant authorization for the Credential issuance.
The response to an Interactive Authorization Request is an HTTP message with the content type `application/json` and a JSON document in the body that indicates

- an error as defined in Section 2.3 of [@!RFC9126], or
- that user interaction is required, as defined in (#iar-interaction-required-response), or
- a successful completion of the authorization, as defined in (#iar-authorization-code-response).

Depending on this assessment, the response from the Interactive Authorization Endpoint can take one of the following forms:

### Interaction Required Response {#iar-interaction-required-response}

The Authorization Server MAY request an additional user interaction by sending a JSON body containing the following keys:

> * `status`: REQUIRED. MUST contain the string `require_interaction`, indicating that additional interaction is required.

Reviewer 6: If this is always required and the value is always set to `require_interaction` then perhaps we can just remove this from the response as its implicit.

```suggestion
```

Otherwise we probably need to re-phrase it so that there can be other possible statuses in future.

Author: I think the real solution is to move "status" one subsection higher and define it there.

> * `type`: REQUIRED. The value indicates which type of interaction is required, as defined below.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* `type`: REQUIRED. String, who value indicates which type of interaction is required, as defined below.
```

> * `auth_session`: REQUIRED. The auth session allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* `auth_session`: REQUIRED. String, the purpose of this parameter is to allow the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. Wallets SHOULD treat this value opaquely.
```

       |  (9) Credential Request      |                        |                           |
       |      (Access Token, proof(s))|                        |                           |
       |------------------------------------------------------>|                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |  (10) Credential Response    |                        |                           |
       |       with Credential(s) OR  |                        |                           |
       |       Transaction ID         |                        |                           |
       |<------------------------------------------------------|                           |
~~~
!---
Figure: Issuance using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint

## Interactive Authorization Request {#interactive-authorization-request}

The request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126, Section 2.1]. The contents of the request are the same as in a regular Authorization Request as defined in (#credential-authz-request), with the following additions:

> ~~~
> POST /par HTTP/1.1
> Host: server.example.com
> Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
> response_type=code
> &client_id=CLIENT1234
> &code_challenge=E9Melhoa2OwvFrEMTJguCHaoeK1t8URWbuGJSstw-cM
> &code_challenge_method=S256
> &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
> &authorization_details=...
> &auth_session=wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS
> ~~~
> 
>  - In case the Wallet has received an Interactive Authorization Response previously, the `auth_session` parameter from that response MUST be included in all subsequent requests (see (#iar-interaction-required-response)).
>  - In case the Wallet has completed a Presentation, it has to include the received redirect URI in the parameter `openid4vp_redirect_uri` (see (#iar-require-presentation)) during the next call to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.
> 
> Note: In case a Wallet Attestation is required by the Authorization Server, it has to be included in this request.
> 

Reviewer 2: I think it's odd having the example there - suggestion moving it a bit later - and also not having 'par' in the example:

```suggestion
 - In case the Wallet has received an Interactive Authorization Response previously, the `auth_session` parameter from that response MUST be included in all subsequent requests (see (#iar-interaction-required-response)).
 - In case the Wallet has completed a Presentation, it has to include the received redirect URI in the parameter `openid4vp_redirect_uri` (see (#iar-require-presentation)) during the next call to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.

Note: In case a Wallet Attestation is required by the Authorization Server, it has to be included in this request.

The following non-normative example shows a request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint where the Wallet has already received an `auth_session`:

~~~
POST /iar HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

response_type=code
&client_id=CLIENT1234
&code_challenge=E9Melhoa2OwvFrEMTJguCHaoeK1t8URWbuGJSstw-cM
&code_challenge_method=S256
&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
&authorization_details=...
&auth_session=wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS
~~~

```

One small point - it's somewhat odd to include a redirect uri, given it won't ever be used in some implementations, but also we can't just omit it as the wallet doesn't really know if it will receive a `redirect_to_web` or not.

  &error_description=Unsupported%20response_type%20value
```

# Interactive Authorization Endpoint

This is an extension of the traditional Authorization Endpoint defined in [@!RFC6749], enabling complex authentication and authorization flows where an Issuer interacts directly with the Wallet.

> A primary use case is an Issuer requesting a Presentation of a Credential using [@!OpenID4VP] before issuing its own Credential.

Reviewer 3: Also isn't Presentation of a Credential *not* using [@!OpenID4VP] a use case for this? As I understand it, Presentation of a Credential using [@!OpenID4VP] as a prerequisite for issuing a new Credential could be accomplished by using [@!OpenID4VP].

> This is an extension of the traditional Authorization Endpoint defined in [@!RFC6749], enabling complex authentication and authorization flows where an Issuer interacts directly with the Wallet.
> A primary use case is an Issuer requesting a Presentation of a Credential using [@!OpenID4VP] before issuing its own Credential.

Reviewer 3: but if you don't want to say Authorization Server, something like this ?
```suggestion
This is an extension of the traditional Authorization Endpoint defined in [@!RFC6749], enabling complex authentication and authorization flows where interaction occurs directly with the Wallet rather than being intermediated by a browser. 
A primary use case is requiring the Presentation of a Credential as a prerequisite for issuing a new Credential.
```

> A primary use case is an Issuer requesting a Presentation of a Credential using [@!OpenID4VP] before issuing its own Credential.

Author: That proposal looks fine, let's take that.

Support for the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is OPTIONAL.

The Authorization Server indicates support for interactive authorization by publishing the `interactive_authorization_endpoint` parameter in its Authorization Server Metadata. In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization.

> Note: This mechanism can only be used for interactions with the same Wallet that started the issuance process.

Reviewer 7: It's always an instruction to the wallet, true. But, specifically for a presentation you *could* request it from another wallet on the device (this would in fact be a useful capability). Given we do not have that capability I thought it was worth calling out (especially as I've seen people being confused on that). 

In the future, you could have an interaction that tells the wallet 'go make a DC API presentation and return the result to me' (for example), which would no longer stay in the 'same wallet'.

> Note: This mechanism can only be used for interactions with the same Wallet that started the issuance process.

Reviewer 2: Yes, agree with Gareth - the point we wanted to get across is that wallet implementers shouldn't even try and jump through the gymnastics of trying to get one wallet to fetch a credential from a different wallet because it just doesn't work at the protocol level.

> Note: This mechanism can only be used for interactions with the same Wallet that started the issuance process.

Author: Moved back!

The following figure illustrates a flow using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint, where the Authorization Server requests a Presentation (of another Credential) from the Wallet as part of the authorization process to issue a Credential to that Wallet. The exact deployment model of the OpenID4VP Verifier in relation to the Authorization Server is out of scope of this specification. It can be integrated into the Authorization Server or a separate component, in which case backchannel communication between the Verifier and Authorization Server would need to happen (not shown here).

!---

> ~~~ ascii-art

Reviewer 6: This sequence diagram is helpful but it still misses the overal context of the protocol flow IMO, for example how does a wallet know to hit the interactive authorization endpoint vs the conventional authorization endpoint OR the par endpoint?

Reviewer 2: This is covered in the introduction - "In this case [the endpoint being present], the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization.".

 - In case the Wallet has completed a Presentation ((#iar-require-presentation)) or a custom interaction ((#iar-custom-extensions)), it has to include a token in the parameter `interactive_binding_token` during the next call to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint. The details of this token are specified in the respective section below.

Note: In case a Wallet Attestation is required by the Authorization Server, it has to be included in this request.

Communication with the Interactive Authorization Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

The following non-normative example shows a request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint where the Wallet has already received an `auth_session`:

```http
POST /iar HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

response_type=code
&client_id=CLIENT1234
&code_challenge=E9Melhoa2OwvFrEMTJguCHaoeK1t8URWbuGJSstw-cM
&code_challenge_method=S256
&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
&authorization_details=...

> &auth_session=wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS

Reviewer 6: Thinking about this more, given in the protocol flow above. this endpoint could be hit multiple times, are things like code_challenge suppose to remain consistent across requests for the same auth_session? Otherwise for PKCE which challenge value should be provided at the token endpoint when the flow completes? What about things like client authentication and whats in the authorization_details object, does all this need to remain consistent across requests?

Reviewer 7: If there is no overlap between the initial and follow-up messages, defining two structures (one for 'initialize' one for 'submit') may make sense, to make clear this separation.

Author: The example is wrong, yes. I'll fix that.

 2. a successful completion of the authorization, as defined in (#iar-authorization-code-response), or
 3. an error as defined in Section 2.3 of [@!RFC9126].

Except in error cases, the following key is required in the JSON document of the response:

* `status`: REQUIRED. String indicating whether an additional interaction is required or the authorization has been completed.

Depending on this assessment, the response from the Interactive Authorization Endpoint can take one of the following forms:

### Interaction Required Response {#iar-interaction-required-response}
By setting `status` to `require_interaction` in the response, the Authorization Server requests an additional user interaction.
In this case, the following keys MUST be present in the response as well:

* `type`: REQUIRED. String indicating which type of interaction is required, as defined below.
* `auth_session`: REQUIRED. String containing a value that allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. Wallets SHOULD treat this value opaquely.

> The Wallet MUST include the `auth_session` in all follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.

Reviewer 6: See my comment above r.e repeated requests to the same endpoint, perhaps it is better for follow up requests to just contain the auth_session parameter as a handle to the current session instead of repeating the parameters?

Following the definition of this response mode, the Wallet sends an HTTP POST request to the endpoint indicated by the `response_uri` parameter in the Authorization Request to either complete the presentation (sending the VP Token) or to indicate an error.
The Verifier MUST respond to this message by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.

Note: Sending `redirect_uri` is defined as OPTIONAL in [@!OpenID4VP], but it is REQUIRED here.

In a regular presentation flow, the Wallet would be expected to follow this redirect.
In the case described here, the Wallet MUST NOT follow the redirect URI and MUST instead repeat the request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint and in this request include the received redirect URI in the `interactive_binding_token` parameter.
The Wallet MUST NOT modify the URI in any way and treat it as an opaque value.
The Issuer MUST verify that the redirect URI in the `interactive_binding_token` parameter is correct, i.e., matches the one sent in response to the request to the `response_uri`.

> Since the redirect URI MUST include a fresh, cryptographically random value, this check helps to present Session Fixation attacks, see (#iar-security).

Reviewer 3: assuming again
```suggestion
Since the redirect URI MUST include a fresh, cryptographically random value, this check helps to prevent Session Fixation attacks, see (#iar-security).
```

#### Redirect to Web

If the type is `redirect_to_web`, the Authorization Server wants to fall back to a regular interaction with the user.

In this case, the Authorization server MUST include the key `request_uri` in the response.
The Wallet MUST use the `request_uri` value to build an Authorization Request as defined in Section 4 of [@!RFC9126] and complete the rest of the authorization process as defined there.
The Authorization Server MAY include the `expires_in` key as defined in [@!RFC9126].

Non-normative Example:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "redirect_to_web",
  "request_uri": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",
  "expires_in": 60
}
```

#### Custom Interaction Extensions {#iar-custom-extensions}

> Additional, custom types of interactions MAY be defined by extensions of this specification to enable other types of interactions, for example, scanning of an NFC card.

Reviewer 8: Not entirely sure right now how to better word this, but if I recall correctly we wanted to explicitly mention smart cards here (fitting to the example below)? scanning an NFC card sounds kind of wrong to me?

Not sure this is better, maybe @paulbastian has a better wording?
```suggestion
Additional, custom types of interactions MAY be defined by extensions of this specification to enable other types of interactions, for example, by interacting with a smart card.
```

It is RECOMMENDED to use this extension point instead of modifying the OAuth protocol in order to facilitate interactions that require interactions with native components of the Wallet application.
See (#iar-security) for additional security considerations.

In the following non-normative example, this extension point is used to read the Betelgeuse Intergalactic ID card through an NFC interface in the Wallet. A token called `biic_token` is used to start the process.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "betelgeuse_intergalactic_id_card",
  "biic_token": "73475cb40a568e8da8a045ced110137e159f890ac4da883b6b17dc651b3a8049"
}
```

> #### Preventing Session Fixation Attacks {#iar-security}

Reviewer 7: I believe there is an attack as follows: 

We have two issuers: Issuer A as an attacker, and Issuer B, who uses iar with presentation. Then we have a Good Wallet.

Good Wallet engages in an authorization request with Issuer A. Issuer A then engages an iar with Issuer B, which returns a presentation request + auth_session to Issuer B. 

Issuer A then returns the same presentation request + auth session to the Wallet. The Wallet verifies it as being a trusted request from Issuer B which, using direct post, submits the presentation to Issuer B. The wallet then returns the redirect_url to Issuer A who returns the redirect_url to Issuer B, getting authorized. 

(Obviously, there are other potential mitigations, like Wallet Attestations to prevent Issuer A from ever talking to Issuer B). 

I think this problem gets solved if there is some way to bind the intended iar endpoint to the response, or request? 

(so, e.g. using it instead of response_url, which would kinda make sense, as you are conceptually 'redirecting' to the iar endpoint to prevent session fixation and that'd allow the Wallet to verify correctness).

Reviewer 7: I think that that would work (you could even overload the redirect_uri for that purpose)

It'd be nice if the iar endpoint was in the audience/session transcript of the presentation so the verifier can simply reject. Conceptually, it is playing the role of 'origin' (and both parties can get it separately).

Author: [This commit](https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/509/commits/066d409adcb0922636001de8f2cce348ee3b68c9) should implement what you're describing. I'm not sure if we actually need signed and unsigned requests, but for now, both are parts of this proposal.

Authorization Servers MUST ensure that the user interaction (OpenID4VP presentation, redirect to web, or a custom interaction) is securely bound to the authorization process in order avoid Session Fixation Attacks as described in Section 14.2 of [@!OpenID4VP].
This can be achieved by securely linking all requests following the initial Interactive Authorization Request.
For OpenID4VP presentations, the Authorization Server MUST associate the `nonce` value used in the Presentation with the `auth_session` value and verify that the Presentation delivered from the Wallet to the Verifier uses the same nonce.
Together with the verification of the value of the `interactive_binding_token` described in {#iar-require-presentation}, this ensures a secure linking.

Custom extensions ((#iar-custom-extensions)) MUST ensure an equivalent binding.
Authorization Servers can usually achieve this by providing a nonce for use in the custom process (`biic_token` in the example above) and verifying a non-predictable value returned from the process in the `interactive_binding_token`.

### Authorization Code Response {#iar-authorization-code-response}

> Once the Authorization Server has successfully processed the Interactive Authorization Request, it MUST respond with a 200 OK response using the `application/json` media type containing the `authorization_code` parameter as defined in [@!RFC9126].

Reviewer 4: `request_uri`, not `authorization_code` is defined RFC9126.

  1. The `response_type` MUST be `vp_token` (defined in Section 8 of [@!OpenID4VP]).
  2. The `response_mode` of the request MUST be `direct_post` (defined in Section 8.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]) or `direct_post.jwt` (defined in Section 8.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP]).
     Following the definition of this response mode, the Wallet sends an HTTP POST request to the endpoint indicated by the `response_uri` parameter in the Authorization Request to either complete the presentation (sending the VP Token) or to indicate an error.
     The Verifier MUST respond to this message by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.

     Note: Sending `redirect_uri` is defined as OPTIONAL in [@!OpenID4VP], but it is REQUIRED here.

     In a regular presentation flow, the Wallet would be expected to follow this redirect.
     In the case described here, the Wallet MUST NOT follow the redirect URI and MUST instead repeat the request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint and in this request include the received redirect URI in the `interactive_binding_token` parameter.
     The Wallet MUST NOT modify the URI in any way and treat it as an opaque value.

>      The Issuer MUST verify that the redirect URI in the `interactive_binding_token` parameter is correct, i.e., matches the one sent in response to the request to the `response_uri`.

Reviewer 2: > I agree that this seems to make the design a lot simpler from the VCI perspective, but also means that you could not as easily leverage existing OpenID4VP deployments (that are already used for other things).
 
I'm not sure it makes a significant difference - any existing verifier is going to require some relatively simple but not trivial updates to it's verification logic anyway, my gut feeling is towards Gareth's suggestion.

>      The Issuer MUST verify that the redirect URI in the `interactive_binding_token` parameter is correct, i.e., matches the one sent in response to the request to the `response_uri`.

Reviewer 7: Nothing stops the authorization server redirecting internally, right? Only really different if you aren't encrypting the response (and so would expose an extra server to the PII)

     Since the redirect URI MUST include a fresh, cryptographically random value, this check helps to prevent Session Fixation attacks, see (#iar-security).

>   3. The URL of the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint becomes the Origin for the request; i.e., the Wallet MUST ensure that `expected_origins` contains the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint URL.

Author: In the intro to this section there is an explicit reference to the DC API appendix in VP, as the logic for the requests is the same.

>   3. The URL of the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint becomes the Origin for the request; i.e., the Wallet MUST ensure that `expected_origins` contains the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint URL.

Reviewer 2: Ah, thanks. I had missed and/or not fully understood the implications of that text - I've added a separate comment on that.

I think the "i.e." isn't appropriate still, as this is an example of one of the behaviours that follows, but is not a comprehensive list (for example it also means that this url is what the wallet uses for authenticating the verifier in an unsigned request). Also clarify that this behaviour is only for signed requests:

```suggestion
  3. The URL of the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint becomes the Origin for the request; e.g.., for signed requests the Wallet MUST ensure that `expected_origins` contains the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint URL.
```

Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "redirect_to_web",
  "request_uri": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",
  "expires_in": 60
}
```

#### Custom Interaction Extensions {#iar-custom-extensions}

Additional, custom types of interactions MAY be defined by extensions of this specification to enable other types of interactions, for example, by interacting with a smart card.
It is RECOMMENDED to use this extension point instead of modifying the OAuth protocol in order to facilitate interactions that require interactions with native components of the Wallet application.
See (#iar-security) for additional security considerations.

In the following non-normative example, this extension point is used to read the Betelgeuse Intergalactic ID card through an NFC interface in the Wallet. A token called `biic_token` is used to start the process.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "betelgeuse_intergalactic_id_card",
  "biic_token": "73475cb40a568e8da8a045ced110137e159f890ac4da883b6b17dc651b3a8049"
}
```

> #### Preventing Session Fixation Attacks {#iar-security}

Reviewer 4: Should this section also consider collusion between two Wallets? I feel that credentials use case lends itself to this sort of behaviour outlined below: 

For example let's say Dave wanted to obtain a AWS Certification that he did not have, but Alice does. Dave could collaborate with Alice (say for payment)

1. Dave initiates authentication
2. Dave passes the presentation request and nonce to Alice who share's her ID
3. She sends Dave the redirect_uri and completes authentication 
4. Issuer sends Dave the certification credential bound to a key controlled by Dave.

       |                              |                        |                           |
       |  (10) Credential Response    |                        |                           |
       |       with Credential(s) OR  |                        |                           |
       |       Transaction ID         |                        |                           |
       |<----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
~~~
!---
Figure: Issuance using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint

## Interactive Authorization Request {#interactive-authorization-request}

All communication with the Interactive Authorization Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

Note: In case a Wallet Attestation is required by the Authorization Server, it has to be included in this request.

### Initial Request

The initial request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126, Section 2.1]. The contents of the request are the same as in a regular Authorization Request as defined in (#credential-authz-request), with the following addition:

> `interaction_types_supported`: REQUIRED. Comma-separated list of strings indicating the types of interactions that the Authorization Server supports. The order of the values is significant. The following values are defined by this specification:

Reviewer 7: Why are the order of the values significant?

Author: I meant to say *insignificant

> `interaction_types_supported`: REQUIRED. Comma-separated list of strings indicating the types of interactions that the Authorization Server supports. The order of the values is significant. The following values are defined by this specification:
> 
> * `openid4vp_presentation`: Indicates that the Authorization Server supports an OpenID4VP Presentation interaction, as defined in (#iar-require-presentation).
> * `redirect_to_web`: Indicates that the Authorization Server supports a redirect to a web-based interaction, as defined in (#iar-redirect-to-web).
> 
> Custom interaction types (see (#iar-custom-extensions)) MAY be defined by the Authorization Server and used in the `interaction_types_supported` parameter.

Reviewer 2: I think some of these "Authorization Servers" need to be "Wallet"? And clarify why the order is significant:

```suggestion
`interaction_types_supported`: REQUIRED. Comma-separated list of strings indicating the types of interactions that the Wallet supports. The order of the values is significant, with first entry in the list indicating the most preferred method. The following values are defined by this specification:

* `openid4vp_presentation`: Indicates that the Wallet supports an OpenID4VP Presentation interaction, as defined in (#iar-require-presentation).
* `redirect_to_web`: Indicates that the Wallet supports a redirect to a web-based interaction, as defined in (#iar-redirect-to-web).

Custom interaction types (see (#iar-custom-extensions)) MAY be defined by the Authorization Server and used in the `interaction_types_supported` parameter.
```

The following non-normative example shows an initial request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint:

```http
POST /iar HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

response_type=code
&client_id=CLIENT1234
&code_challenge=E9Melhoa2OwvFrEMTJguCHaoeK1t8URWbuGJSstw-cM
&code_challenge_method=S256
&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
&authorization_details=...
&interaction_types_supported=openid4vp_presentation,redirect_to_web
```

### Follow-up Request

> Follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint only MUST include the `auth_session` value received most recently from the Authorization Server (see (#iar-interaction-required-response)).

Reviewer 2: It actually seems wrong to have "only" given there will be other parameters and the paragraph below properly explains it.

```suggestion
Follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint MUST include the `auth_session` value received most recently from the Authorization Server (see (#iar-interaction-required-response)).
```

In this case, the following keys MUST be present in the response as well:

* `type`: REQUIRED. String indicating which type of interaction is required, as defined below. The Authorization Server MUST NOT set this to a value that was not included in the `interaction_types_supported` parameter sent by the Wallet.
* `auth_session`: REQUIRED. String containing a value that allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. Wallets SHOULD treat this value as an opaque value.

The Wallet MUST include the `auth_session` in all follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.
If, as a response to such a follow-up request, the Wallet receives an `auth_session` value that differs from the one sent in the request, it MUST abort the issuance process.

If a wallet receives a `type` value that it does not recognize, it MUST abort the issuance process.

Additional keys are defined based on the type of interaction, as shown next.

#### Require Presentation {#iar-require-presentation}

> If `type` is set to `openid4vp_presentation`, as shown in the following example, the response MUST further include an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter containing an OpenID4VP Authorization Request, either in unsigned form as defined in Appendix A.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP] or signed as defined in Appendix A.3.2 of [@!OpenID4VP].

Reviewer 2: I missed all the implications of this text on the first reading.

```suggestion
If `type` is set to `openid4vp_presentation`, as shown in the following example, the response MUST further include an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter containing an OpenID4VP Authorization Request, either in unsigned form as defined in Appendix A.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP] or signed as defined in Appendix A.3.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]. Although these sections define requests and responses that are normally sent over the Digital Credentials API, in this case they are sent directly between the wallet and the credential issuer.
```

I think we should also move the 'additional requirements' up directly below this paragraph, as I think it's important to have the "use requests like to the DC API" and "but with these changes" right next to each other.

The following is a non-normative example of an unsigned Authorization Request:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "openid4vp_presentation",
  "auth_session": "wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS",
  "openid4vp_presentation": {

>     "client_id": "x509_san_dns:rp.example.com",

Reviewer 2: I think (as this is an unsigned request) `client_id` should actually be omitted.

```suggestion
```

          "format": "dc+sd-jwt",
          "meta": {
            "vct_values": [ "https://credentials.example.com/identity_credential" ]
          },
          "claims": [
              {"path": ["last_name"]},
              {"path": ["first_name"]}
          ]
        }
      ]
    },
    "nonce": "n-0S6_WzA2Mj"
  }
}
```

The following is a non-normative example of a signed Authorization Request:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "openid4vp_presentation",
  "auth_session": "wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS",
  "openid4vp_presentation": {
    "request": "eyJhbGciOiJF..."
  }
}
```

The Wallet MUST process the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter as defined in [@!OpenID4VP] to perform a Credential Presentation to the Authorization Server.

For the requested Presentation, the Issuer is acting as a Verifier to the Wallet.
The exact architecture and the deployment of the Issuer's OpenID4VP Verifier is out of scope of this specification.

The following additional requirements apply:

  1. The `response_type` MUST be `vp_token` (defined in Section 8 of [@!OpenID4VP]).

>   2. The `response_mode` of the request MUST be `direct_post` (defined in Section 8.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]) or `direct_post.jwt` (defined in Section 8.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP]).

Reviewer 7: Given the changes on validation and session transcript, and aud contents it would seem a lot cleaner to define a new response mode (even if we base it on direct_post).

#### Preventing Forwarding of Interactive Authorization Endpoint Presentation Requests

In ecosystems with multiple Authorization Servers that may potentially use the Interactive Authorization Endpoint, there is a risk that a malicious (or compromised) Authorization Server forwards an Interactive Authorization Response containing a Interaction Required Response that it itself has acquired from another Authorization Server.
This may lead to the malicious Authorization Server gaining access to Credentials issued by the other Authorization Server without the End-User's consent.

Custom extensions ((#iar-custom-extensions)) MUST ensure that this attack is prevented by ensuring one or both of the following:

 1. The Wallet is able to detect that a request is not presented by the party that initiated the Interactive Authorization Request. In the case of the (#iar-require-presentation) interaction with a signed Presentation request, this is achieved by the Wallet verifying the `expected_origins` parameter in the request, which contains the URL of the Interactive Authorization Endpoint that initiated the request.

>  2. The Authorization Server is able to detect that the request was forwarded to a different endpoint. In the case of the (#iar-require-presentation) interaction, this is achieved for both signed and unsigned requests by the Wallet including the Interactive Authorization Endpoint URL in the `aud` value of the request, which is then verified by the Authorization Server.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
 2. The Authorization Server is able to detect that the request was forwarded to a different endpoint. In the case of the (#iar-require-presentation) interaction, this is achieved for both signed and unsigned requests by the Wallet including the Interactive Authorization Endpoint URL in the `aud` value of the response, which is then verified by the Authorization Server.
```

       |  (7) Credential Request      |                        |
       |      (Access Token, proof(s))|                        |
       |------------------------------------------------------>|
       |                              |                        |
       |  (8) Credential Response     |                        |
       |       with Credential(s) OR  |                        |
       |       Transaction ID         |                        |
       |<------------------------------------------------------|
~~~
!---
Figure: Issuance using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint

## Interactive Authorization Request {#interactive-authorization-request}

All communication with the Interactive Authorization Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

Note: In case a Wallet Attestation is required by the Authorization Server, it has to be included in this request.

### Initial Request

The initial request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in Section 2.1 of [@!RFC9126]. The contents of the request are the same as in a regular Authorization Request as defined in (#credential-authz-request), with the following addition:

> `interaction_types_supported`: REQUIRED. Comma-separated list of strings indicating the types of interactions that the Authorization Server supports. The order of the values is significant. The following values are defined by this specification:

Reviewer 2: Pretty sure we landed on the order not being significant:

```suggestion
`interaction_types_supported`: REQUIRED. Comma-separated list of strings indicating the types of interactions that the Authorization Server supports. The order of the values is not significant. The following values are defined by this specification:
```

* `openid4vp_presentation`: Indicates that the Authorization Server supports an OpenID4VP Presentation interaction, as defined in (#iar-require-presentation).
* `redirect_to_web`: Indicates that the Authorization Server supports a redirect to a web-based interaction, as defined in (#iar-redirect-to-web).

Custom interaction types (see (#iar-custom-extensions)) MAY be defined by the Authorization Server and used in the `interaction_types_supported` parameter.

The following non-normative example shows an initial request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint:

```http
POST /iar HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

response_type=code
&client_id=CLIENT1234
&code_challenge=E9Melhoa2OwvFrEMTJguCHaoeK1t8URWbuGJSstw-cM
&code_challenge_method=S256
&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fclient.example.org%2Fcb
&authorization_details=...
&interaction_types_supported=openid4vp_presentation,redirect_to_web
```

### Follow-up Request

Follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint only MUST include the `auth_session` value received most recently from the Authorization Server (see (#iar-interaction-required-response)).

> Besides `auth_session`, follow-up requests only include the parameters that are relevant for the next step in the authorization process. The specific parameters are defined by each interaction type.

Reviewer 2: I don't think "parameters that are relevant for the next step" is correct, the parameters you're including are the ones the authorization server requested for the current step.

```suggestion
Besides `auth_session`, follow-up requests only include the parameters that are in response to the interaction type the Authorization Server requested in the most recent response. The specific parameters are defined by each interaction type.
```

  &error_description=Unsupported%20response_type%20value
```

# Interactive Authorization Endpoint

An Authorization Server MAY publish the `interactive_authorization_endpoint` parameter in its Authorization Server Metadata.
In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization.
This enables use cases where an Issuer requests Presentation of a Credential before issuing its Credential.

Note: This mechanism can only be used for interactions with the same Wallet that started the issuance process.

> The following Figure illustrates a flow using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint, where the Authorization Server requests presentation of a Credential from the Wallet before the issuance of another Credential to the Wallet.

Reviewer 6: In any case we should agree whether this seperation should exist as its also reflected in the figure below. I'd prefer we collapse it back into just Credential Issuer and just say for this feature to work the Credential Issuer must also implement the requisite parts of OpenID4VP in order for this to work.

!---
~~~ ascii-art
 +-----------+            +----------------------+     +-------------------+    +--------------------+
 |   Wallet  |            | Authorization Server |     | Credential Issuer |    | OpenID4VP Verifier |
 +-----------+            +----------------------+     +-------------------+    +--------------------+
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |----------------------------->|  (1) Interactive       |                           |
       |                              |      Authorization     |                           |
       |                              |      Request           |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |<-----------------------------|  (2) Request           |                           |

>        |                              |      Presentation      |                           |

Author: It was not intended to be a name, but a description.

       |  (10) Credential Response    |                        |                           |
       |       with Credential(s) OR  |                        |                           |
       |       Transaction ID         |                        |                           |
       |<------------------------------------------------------|                           |
~~~
!---
Figure: Issuance using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint

## Interactive Authorization Request {#interactive-authorization-request}

The request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126, Section 2.1], with the following additions:

 - In case the Wallet has received an `auth_session` parameter previously, it has to be included in this request (see (#iar-interaction-required)).
 - In case the Wallet has completed a Presentation, it has to include the received redirect URI in the parameter `openid4vp_redirect_uri` (see (#iar-require-presentation)) during the next call to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.

Note: In case a wallet attestation is required by the Issuer, it has to be included in this request.

> ## Interactive Authorization Response

Author: Added a suggestion to fix this in the figure.

Upon receiving an Interactive Authorization Request, the Issuer determines whether the authorization request is semantically correct and valid, and whether the information provided by the Wallet so far is sufficient to grant authorization for the Credential issuance.

> The response to an Interactive Authorization Request is an HTTP message with the content type `application/json` and a JSON document in the body that indicates

Author: Not sure the "either" is required, but okay to add it. The colon is not correct here.

- an error as defined in Section 2.3 of [@!RFC9126], or

> - that additional user interaction is required, as defined in (#iar-interaction-required), or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- that additional user interaction is required, as defined in (#iar-interaction-required-response), or
```

> - a successful completion of the authorization, as defined in (#authorization-code-response).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- a successful completion of the authorization, as defined in (#iar-authorization-code-response).
```

Depending on this assessment, the response from the Interactive Authorization Endpoint can take one of the following forms:

> ### Additional Interaction Required {#iar-interaction-required}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Interaction Required Response {#iar-interaction-required}
```

The Authorization Server MAY request an additional user interaction by sending a JSON body containing the following keys:

* `status`: MANDATORY. MUST contain the string `require_interaction`, indicating that additional interaction is required.
* `type`: MANDATORY. The value indicates which type of interaction is required, as defined below.
* `auth_session`: OPTIONAL. The auth session allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. The Wallet MUST include the `auth_session` in follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint if it receives one along with the error response.

Additional keys are defined based on the type of interaction, as shown next.

#### Require Presentation {#iar-require-presentation}

If `type` is set to `openid4vp_presentation`, as shown in the following example, the response MUST further include an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter containing an Authorization Request as defined in Section 5 of [@!OpenID4VP], encoded in JSON.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",

>   "type": "openid4vp_presentation",

Author: I went back and forth on this a couple of times, but I think separating it like this feels a bit cleaner for potential extensions.

>   "type": "openid4vp_presentation",

Reviewer 6: See my comment above r.e extensibility of status, I'm not sure im following the extensibility model.

          },
          "claims": [
              {"path": ["last_name"]},
              {"path": ["first_name"]}
          ]
        }
      ]
    },
    "nonce": "n-0S6_WzA2Mj"
  }
}
```

The Wallet MUST process the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter as defined in [@!OpenID4VP] to perform a Credential Presentation to the Authorization Server.

For the requested Presentation, the Issuer is acting as a Verifier to the Wallet.
The exact architecture and the deployment of the Issuer's OpenID4VP Verifier is out of scope of this specification.

In the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter, the `response_type` MUST be `vp_token` (defined in Section 8 of [@!OpenID4VP]).

The `response_mode` of the request MUST be `direct_post` (defined in Section 8.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]) or `direct_post.jwt` (defined in Section 8.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP]).
Following the definition of this response mode, the Wallet sends an HTTP POST request to the endpoint indicated by the `response_uri` parameter in the Authorization Request to either complete the presentation (sending the VP Token) or to indicate an error.

> In either case, the Verifier responds by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.

Author: Should be made mandatory; I'll add a suggestion.

In a regular presentation flow, the Wallet would be expected to follow this redirect.
In the case described here, the Wallet MUST NOT follow the redirect URI and MUST instead repeat the request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint and in this request include the received redirect URI in the `openid4vp_redirect_uri` parameter.
The Issuer MUST verify that the redirect URI is correct, i.e., matches the one sent in response to the request to the `response_uri`.

> Since the redirect URI MUST include a fresh, cryptographically random value, this check helps to present Session Fixation attacks, see (#iar-security).

Reviewer 4: I wonder if more guidance along the following lines would add clarity:

If the Authorization Response to the Verifier was successful, then the Interactive Authorization Endpoint should be an Authorization Code Response. Otherwise, the  Interactive Authorization Endpoint should be an error or an alternative Interaction Required Response

The Authorization Server MAY include the `expires_in` key as defined in [@!RFC9126].

Non-normative Example:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "redirect_to_web",
  "request_uri": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",
  "expires_in": 60
 }
```

#### Custom Extensions {#iar-custom-extensions}

Additional, custom types MAY be defined by extensions of this specification to enable other types of interactions, for example, scanning of an NFC card.
It is RECOMMENDED to use this extension point instead of modifying the OAuth protocol in order to facilitate interactions that require interactions with native components of the Wallet application.

Non-normative Example:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "betelgeuse_intergalactic_id_card",
  "biic_token": "73475cb40a568e8da8a045ced110137e159f890ac4da883b6b17dc651b3a8049"
 }
```

> #### Security Considerations {#iar-security}

Author: I feel this should be closer to the main text, as there are quite important considerations there. I renamed it "Preventing Session Fixation Attacks" to reflect that these are not general security considerations.

Authorization Servers MUST ensure that the user interaction (OpenID4VP presentation, redirect to web, or a custom interaction) is securely bound to the authorization process in order avoid Session Fixation Attacks as described in Section 14.2 of [@!OpenID4VP].
This can be achieved by securely linking all requests following the initial interactive authorization request.

> For OpenID4VP presentations, the Authorization Server MUST associate the `nonce` value used in the Presentation with the `auth_session` value and verify that the Presentation delivered from the Wallet to the Verifier uses the same nonce.

Author: Good point. Also, making auth_session mandatory is probably easier for everybody, so I'll do that.

Together with the verification of the `response_uri` delivered in the following Interactive Authorization Request described in {#iar-require-presentation}, this ensures a secure linking.

Custom extensions (#iar-custom-extensions) MUST ensure that an equivalent binding is ensured.
Authorization Servers can usually achieve this by providing a nonce for use in the custom process (`biic_token` in the example above) and verifying a non-predictable value returned from the process.

> ### Authorization Code Response {#authorization-code-response}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Authorization Code Response {#iar-authorization-code-response}
```

  &error_description=Unsupported%20response_type%20value
```

# Interactive Authorization Endpoint

> An Authorization Server MAY publish the `interactive_authorization_endpoint` parameter in its Authorization Server Metadata. In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization. This enables use cases where an Issuer requests Presentation of a Credential before issuing its Credential.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
An Authorization Server MAY publish the `interactive_authorization_endpoint` parameter in its Authorization Server Metadata. In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization. This enables use cases where an Issuer interacts directly with the wallet, such as requesting  Presentation of a Credential before issuing its Credential.
```

Make it clear this isn't exclusive for this use case.

  &error_description=Unsupported%20response_type%20value
```

> # Authorization Challenge Endpoint

Reviewer 9: Discussing so much about nonces and challenges lately, I wonder if we have a better term than challenge here?

Author: As discussed on the call, this is the name used in the first-party apps draft.

> An Authorization Server MAY publish the `authorization_challenge_endpoint` parameter in its Authorization Server Metadata. In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization. This enables use cases where an Issuer requests Presentation of a Credential before issuing its Credential.

Reviewer 2: Need an IANA consideration for registering `authorization_challenge_endpoint`?

Reviewer 2: Or maybe not? We're reusing the endpoint from https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-parecki-oauth-first-party-apps-02.html#section-10.2 - I'm not 100% sure if that's a good idea or not.

Reviewer 10: Referencing a draft could not be the "best" idea, since it could theoretically change?

       |                              |      (Access Token)    |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |  (8) Credential Request      |                        |                           |
       |      (Access Token, proof(s))|                        |                           |
       |------------------------------------------------------>|                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |  (9) Credential Response     |                        |                           |
       |      with Credential(s) OR   |                        |                           |
       |      Transaction ID          |                        |                           |
       |<------------------------------------------------------|                           |
~~~
!---
Figure: Issuance using Authorization Challenge Endpoint

## Authorization Challenge Request {#authorization-challenge-request}

> The request to the Authorization Challenge Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126.html, Section 2.1], with the following additions:

Reviewer 2: This might fix the compilation:

```suggestion
The request to the Authorization Challenge Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126, Section 2.1], with the following additions:
```

Author: Now I really want to know how the ".html" got in there...

>  - In case a wallet attestation is required by the Issuer, it has to be included in this request.

Reviewer 2: Given that the wallet attestation is a form of client authentication, I think this is actually no different to the PAR endpoint which also requires client authentication?

Author: Fair point.

## Authorization Challenge Response

Upon receiving an Authorization Challenge Request, the Issuer determines whether the information provided by the Wallet so far is sufficient to grant authorization for the Credential issuance. 

Depending on this assessment, the response from the Authorization Challenge Endpoint can take one of the following forms:

### Error - Request Presentation {#error-request-presentation}

The Authorization Server MAY request a Credential Presentation by responding with an error response, indicated by an HTTP 400 (Bad Request) status code. The content type of the error response MUST be `application/json` and the JSON document in the body MUST indicate the `error` code `insufficient_authorization` as shown in the following example. In this case, the response MUST include an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter containing an Authorization Request as defined in Section 5 of [@!OpenID4VP], encoded in JSON.

```
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "error": "insufficient_authorization",
  "auth_session": "123456789",
  "openid4vp_presentation": {
    "client_id": "x509_san_dns:rp.example.com",

>     "request_uri": "https://rp.example.com/oidc/request/1234"

Reviewer 2: I feel like the additional complexity of `request_uri` probably isn't warranted, I would be tempted to show a non-JAR request for the example at least?

Author: I'll use a non-jar request here.

  }
}
```

> The Authorization Server MAY use the `auth_session` parameter in the Authorization Challenge Response. The auth session allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. The Wallet MUST include the `auth_session` in follow-up requests to the Authorization Challenge Endpoint if it receives one along with the error response.

Reviewer 2: Is there actually a way for the AS to implement this without `auth_session`? I could perhaps see people trying to use cookies instead but that seems like a bad idea. I would be tempted to make the 'MAY' a 'MUST' if it's basically required, as this will make interoperability (and conformance testing) easier.

Author: "nonce" together with the redirect_uri mechanism introduced below would be sufficient as well.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, not sure nonce works in all cases (it's not returned in an mdoc response I believe, only a hash of a nonce is). But state would work with the redirect_uri mechanism.

If the error code is `insufficient_authorization` and an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter is present, the Wallet MUST process the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter as defined in [@!OpenID4VP] to perform a Credential Presentation to the Authorization Server.

For the requested Presentation, the Issuer is acting as a Verifier to the Wallet. The exact architecture and the deployment of the Issuer's OpenID4VP Verifier is out of scope of this specification.

In the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter, the `response_type` MUST be `vp_token` (defined in Section 8 of [@!OpenID4VP]).

> The `response_mode` of the request MUST be `direct_post` (defined in Section 8.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]).

Reviewer 2: I can't decide if this is overly restrictive. direct_post.jwt would I think be fine too, and some people seem to prefer things are encrypted.

```suggestion
The `response_mode` of the request MUST be `direct_post` (defined in Section 8.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]) or `direct_post.jwt` (defined in Section 8.3.1 of [@!OpenID4VP]).
```

  &error_description=Unsupported%20response_type%20value
```

# Authorization Challenge Endpoint

> An Authorization Server MAY publish the `authorization_challenge_endpoint` parameter in its Authorization Server Metadata. In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization. This enables use cases where an Issuer requests Presentation of a Credential before issuing its Credential.

Author: Note was added.

       |                              |                        |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |<-----------------------------|  (2) Error: Request    |                           |
       |                              |      Presentation      |                           |
       |                              |      (presentation     |                           |
       |                              |      request,          |                           |
       |                              |      auth_session)     |                           |
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |---------------------------------------------------------------------------------->|  (3) OpenID4VP direct_post to Response URI
       |                              |                        |                           |
       |<----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|  (4) (redirect_uri)
       |                              |                        |                           |    

>        |----------------------------->|  (4) Authorization     |                           |

Reviewer 5: there are two step 4

Note: In case a wallet attestation is required by the Issuer, it has to be included in this request.

## Authorization Challenge Response

Upon receiving an Authorization Challenge Request, the Issuer determines whether the information provided by the Wallet so far is sufficient to grant authorization for the Credential issuance. 

Depending on this assessment, the response from the Authorization Challenge Endpoint can take one of the following forms:

### Error - Request Presentation {#error-request-presentation}

The Authorization Server MAY request a Credential Presentation by responding with an error response, indicated by an HTTP 400 (Bad Request) status code. The content type of the error response MUST be `application/json` and the JSON document in the body MUST indicate the `error` code `insufficient_authorization` as shown in the following example. In this case, the response MUST include an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter containing an Authorization Request as defined in Section 5 of [@!OpenID4VP], encoded in JSON.

```

> HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request

Author: Fixed in the latest change.

  &error_description=Unsupported%20response_type%20value
```

> # Authorization Challenge Endpoint

Author: I added a figure to this section instead, in order to not clutter the existing ones.

An Authorization Server MAY publish parameter `authorization_challenge_endpoint` in its Authorization Server Metadata. In this case, the Wallet SHOULD use this endpoint to obtain authorization. This enables use cases where an Issuer requests Presentation of a Credential before issuing its Credential.

## Authorization Challenge Request

The request to the Authorization Challenge Endpoint follows the same rules as the Pushed Authorization Request (see (#pushed-authorization-request)).

## Authorization Challenge Response

The response from the Authorization Challenge Endpoint can take one of the following forms:

### Error - Request Presentation 

> The Authorization Server MAY request a Credential Presentation by responding with the `error` code `insufficient_authorization`. In this case, it MUST include a `presentation` parameter containing an Authorization Request as defined in Section 5 of [@!OpenID4VP], encoded in JSON.

Reviewer 7: We should probably also consider, or provide some guidance around session fixation attacks (given redirect_uri is the only defense against this for direct_post and not applicable in this case.) 

It feels like it'd be good to bind this to issuance session, or at the very least make sure it can't be used as a 'normal' OpenID4VP to phish a user. I think presentation_during_issuance_session might be able to be used for that.

> The Authorization Server MAY request a Credential Presentation by responding with the `error` code `insufficient_authorization`. In this case, it MUST include a `presentation` parameter containing an Authorization Request as defined in Section 5 of [@!OpenID4VP], encoded in JSON.

Reviewer 2: I think there might be something that's left unsaid. I *think* this mechanism only works when the presentation is by the same wallet that the new credential is being issued to? (If we start launching other wallets, I don't think there's a standards-based way to return the UX flow back to the original wallet to continue the credential issuance.)

That would then mean there is no front channel redirect and no cross-device qr code, which I think means session fixation is not a problem. The issuer can use state to do the session binding.

I think we probably need to be more explicit about some of these things. And as Tobias said a sequence diagram would likely be helpful...

> The Authorization Server MAY request a Credential Presentation by responding with the `error` code `insufficient_authorization`. In this case, it MUST include a `presentation` parameter containing an Authorization Request as defined in Section 5 of [@!OpenID4VP], encoded in JSON.

Author: These are all good points; please review the latest changes. Executive summary:
- I clarified that direct_post and the response type vp_token must be used.
- I added that the redirect must be ignored, instead...
- The redirect_uri received by the Wallet from the Verifier in the response to the direct_post to the response_uri now needs to be included in the subsequenct request to the authorization challenge endpoint. This should solve the same problems that presentation_during_issuance_session addresses (since the URI must contain a nonce by definition) without introducing a new artifact.

@cre8

```
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "error": "insufficient_authorization",
  "auth_session": "123456789",

>   "presentation": {

Reviewer 6: Given this is OpenID4VP specific, could this be "openid4vp_presentation".

    "client_id": "x509_san_dns:rp.example.com",
    "request_uri": "https://rp.example.com/oidc/request/1234"
  }
}
```

If the error code is `insufficient_authorization` and a `presentation` parameter is present, the Wallet MUST process the Authorization Request contained in the `presentation` parameter as defined in [@!OpenID4VP] to perform a Credential Presentation to the Authorization Server. It is then expected to repeat the Authorization Challenge Request.

The Authorization Server MAY use the `auth_session` parameter in the Authorization Challenge Response. The auth session allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. The Wallet MUST include the `auth_session` in follow-up requests to the Authorization Challenge Endpoint if it receives one along with the error response.

#todo: Determine whether we needs presentation_during_issuance_session

> ### Error - Show Website

Reviewer 11: Is the show website in this case the "normal" par flow, or just a generic webpage not used for authorization? 

In the first party auth spec the challenge endpoint could fallback to behave like the par endpoint and return a request_uri, i think it will be useful to add this here as well, since a wallet won't know beforehand whether to use authorization challenge or PAR endpoint (so in our wallet we default to authorization challenge endpoint if available).

Currently i see no way to handle the case where normal par must be used and the wallet calls the challenge endpoint

Author: I will change the logic to the one defined in the [first-part apps draft](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-first-party-apps-01.html#section-5.2.2.1). This should cover at least use cases 1 and 2 listed by Tobias.

> #todo: Determine whether we need this. May need to include privacy considerations.

Author: I don't think we need additional considerations actually. Please review the latest change.

### Other Errors

The Authorization Server MAY respond with other errors as defined in [@!RFC9126].

### Authorization Code Response

> Once the Authorization Server has successfully processed the Authorization Challenge Request, it MUST respond with a 200 OK response containing the `authorization_code` parameter.

Author: Added!

In this case, the following keys MUST be present in the response as well:

* `type`: REQUIRED. String indicating which type of interaction is required, as defined below. The Authorization Server MUST NOT set this to a value that was not included in the `interaction_types_supported` parameter sent by the Wallet.
* `auth_session`: REQUIRED. String containing a value that allows the Authorization Server to associate subsequent requests by this Wallet with the ongoing authorization request sequence. Wallets SHOULD treat this value as an opaque value.

The Wallet MUST include the `auth_session` in all follow-up requests to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.
If, as a response to such a follow-up request, the Wallet receives an `auth_session` value that differs from the one sent in the request, it MUST abort the issuance process.

If a wallet receives a `type` value that it does not recognize, it MUST abort the issuance process.

Additional keys are defined based on the type of interaction, as shown next.

#### Require Presentation {#iar-require-presentation}

> If `type` is set to `openid4vp_presentation`, as shown in the following example, the response MUST further include an `openid4vp_presentation` parameter containing an OpenID4VP Authorization Request. The contents of the request is the same as for requests passed to the Digital Credentials API (see Appendix A.2 and Appendix A.3 of [@!OpenID4VP]), except as follows: 

Reviewer 12: Just bikeshedding the name of the param. Wouldn't `openid4vp_request` be more appropriate?
```suggestion
If `type` is set to `openid4vp_presentation`, as shown in the following example, the response MUST further include an `openid4vp_request` parameter containing an OpenID4VP Authorization Request. The contents of the request is the same as for requests passed to the Digital Credentials API (see Appendix A.2 and Appendix A.3 of [@!OpenID4VP]), except as follows: 
```

  "openid4vp_presentation": {
    "request": "eyJhbGciOiJF..."
  }
}
```

The Wallet MUST process the Authorization Request contained in the `openid4vp_presentation` parameter as defined in [@!OpenID4VP] to perform a Credential Presentation to the Authorization Server.

For the requested Presentation, the Issuer is acting as a Verifier to the Wallet.
The exact architecture and the deployment of the Issuer's OpenID4VP Verifier is out of scope of this specification.

When processing the request the following logic applies:

  1. The URL of the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint becomes the Origin for the request; i.e., the Wallet MUST ensure that `expected_origins` contains the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint URL.
  2. The audience in the response (for example, the `aud` value in a Key Binding JWT) MUST be the Interactive Authorization Request, prefixed with `iar:`, for example `iar:https://example.com/iar`. A response containing a different audience value MUST NOT be accepted.
  3. If a `SessionTranscript` is needed, it is generated according Appendix B.2.6.2 of [@!OpenID4VP]. As above, the value for origin is the Interactive Authorization Request endpoint URL.

> The Interactive Authorization Request, which is used to submit the OpenID4VP Authorization Response MUST satisfy the requirements set out in (#follow-up-request). In addition to these requirements, the request MUST also contain the `openid4vp_presentation` request parameter. The value of the `openid4vp_presentation` request parameter is a JSON-encoded object that encodes the OpenID4VP Authorization Response parameters. In the case of an error it instead encodes the Authorization Error Response parameters. When the `response_mode` is `iar-post.jwt` the OpenID4VP Authorization Response MUST be encrypted according to Section 8.3 of [@!OpenID4VP].

Reviewer 12: See above
```suggestion
The Interactive Authorization Request, which is used to submit the OpenID4VP Authorization Response MUST satisfy the requirements set out in (#follow-up-request). In addition to these requirements, the request MUST also contain the `openid4vp_request` request parameter. The value of the `openid4vp_request` request parameter is a JSON-encoded object that encodes the OpenID4VP Authorization Response parameters. In the case of an error it instead encodes the Authorization Error Response parameters. When the `response_mode` is `iar-post.jwt` the OpenID4VP Authorization Response MUST be encrypted according to Section 8.3 of [@!OpenID4VP].
```

The following us an example non-normative example of a Interactive Authorization Request containing an OpenID4VP Authorization Response:

```http
POST /iar HTTP/1.1
Host: server.example.com
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

auth_session=wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS
&openid4vp_presentation=...
```

The following is a non-normative example of the `openid4vp_presentation` JSON object:

```json
{
  "vp_token": ...
}

```

The following is a non-normative example of the `openid4vp_presentation` JSON object with an encrypted response:

```json
{
  "response": ...
}

```

The following is a non-normative example of the `openid4vp_presentation` JSON object with an Authorization Error Response.

```json
{
  "error": "invalid_request",
  "error_description": "unsupported client_id_prefix"
}

> ```

Reviewer: wg discussion: please continue offline/in another issue

Note: This mechanism can only be used for interactions with the same Wallet that started the issuance process.

#### Redirect to Web {#iar-redirect-to-web}

If the type is `redirect_to_web`, the Authorization Server is indicating that the authorization process must continue via interactions with the user in a web browser.

In this case, the Authorization server MUST include the key `request_uri` in the response.
The Wallet MUST use the `request_uri` value to build an Authorization Request as defined in Section 4 of [@!RFC9126] and complete the rest of the authorization process as defined there.
The Authorization Server MAY include the `expires_in` key as defined in [@!RFC9126].

Non-normative Example:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "redirect_to_web",
  "request_uri": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:request_uri:6esc_11ACC5bwc014ltc14eY22c",
  "expires_in": 60
}
```

> Once this phase of the Authorization process is completed, the Authorization Server MUST redirect back to the Wallet as per [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `code` parameter as per Section 1.3.1 of [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is not complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `auth_session` parameter. In the event a Wallet receives a response from the Authorization Server which features the `auth_session` parameter, the Wallet MUST make a follow-up request as per (#follow-up-request) to continue the Authorization process.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Once this phase of the Authorization process is completed, the Authorization Server MUST redirect the user-agent back to the Wallet as per [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns the `authorization_code` based authorisation response as per Section 1.3.1 of [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is not complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns an authorisation response with the `auth_session` parameter. In the event a Wallet receives a response from the Authorization Server which contains the `auth_session` parameter, the Wallet MUST make a follow-up request as per (#follow-up-request) to continue the Authorization process.
```

@danielfett copied my suggestion from your comment to here.

Reviewer: - @danielfett waiting on the input from @aaronpk if there are any security conciderations we need to add about `auth_session` being returned in the redirect.
- another mix-up attack is introduced here?
@tplooker to open a PR with the suggestion made here so that we can continue security considerations discussion there.

       |<------------------------------------------------------|                           |
~~~
!---
Figure: Issuance using the Interactive Authorization Endpoint

## Interactive Authorization Request {#interactive-authorization-request}

The request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126, Section 2.1], with the following additions:

 - In case the Wallet has received an `auth_session` parameter previously, it has to be included in this request (see (#iar-interaction-required)).

>  - In case the Wallet has completed a Presentation, it has to include the received redirect URI in the parameter `openid4vp_redirect_uri` (see (#iar-require-presentation)) during the next call to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint.

Reviewer 7: Is it worth just calling this interactive_binding_token or something (that is defined as redirect_uri in the require-presentation), given that we think it should always exist, and makes its purpose more clear?

### Initial Request

The initial request to the Interactive Authorization Endpoint is formed and sent in the same way as PAR request as defined in [@!RFC9126, Section 2.1]. The contents of the request are the same as in a regular Authorization Request as defined in (#credential-authz-request), with the following addition:

> `interaction_types_supported`: REQUIRED. Comma-separated list of strings indicating the types of interactions that the Authorization Server supports. The order of the values is significant. The following values are defined by this specification:

Reviewer 2: It's possibly odd that in an signed request this would mean:

`"interaction_types_supported": "openid4vp_presentation,redirect_to_web"`

when possibly people might expect:

`"interaction_types_supported": [ "openid4vp_presentation", "redirect_to_web"]`

(Not sure I'm suggesting changing anything, but an example of the contents of a signed request could be useful to avoid misinterpretation.)

Reviewer 7: leaving this as a TODO in a follow-up

Reviewer 2: raised https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/issues/579 to track it

> In either case, the Verifier responds by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Verifier responds by sending a JSON object containing a `redirect_uri` parameter.
```
Unsure what 'in either case' is referring to?

}
```

The following is a non-normative example of a signed Authorization Request:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "status": "require_interaction",
  "type": "openid4vp_presentation",
  "auth_session": "wxroVrBY2MCq4dDNGXACS",
  "openid4vp_presentation": {

>     "request": "eyJhbGciOiJF..."

Reviewer 2: I think `client_id` is mandatory to include alongside request?

}
```

> Once this phase of the Authorization process is completed, the Authorization Server MUST redirect back to the Wallet as per [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `authorization_code` parameter as per Section 1.3.1 of [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is not complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `auth_session` parameter. In the event a Wallet receives a response from the Authorization Server which features the `auth_session` parameter, the Wallet MUST make a follow-up request as per (#follow-up-request) to continue the Authorization process.

Author: "returns a response with" means that the parameter is appended to the redirect URI?

> Once this phase of the Authorization process is completed, the Authorization Server MUST redirect back to the Wallet as per [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `authorization_code` parameter as per Section 1.3.1 of [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is not complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `auth_session` parameter. In the event a Wallet receives a response from the Authorization Server which features the `auth_session` parameter, the Wallet MUST make a follow-up request as per (#follow-up-request) to continue the Authorization process.

Reviewer 6: Yes on both accounts here, what about.

```
Once this phase of the Authorization process is completed, the Authorization Server MUST redirect the user-agent back to the Wallet as per [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns the `authorization_code` based authorisation response as per Section 1.3.1 of [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is not complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns an authorisation response with the `auth_session` parameter. In the event a Wallet receives a response from the Authorization Server which contains the `auth_session` parameter, the Wallet MUST make a follow-up request as per (#follow-up-request) to continue the Authorization process.
```

> Once this phase of the Authorization process is completed, the Authorization Server MUST redirect back to the Wallet as per [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `authorization_code` parameter as per Section 1.3.1 of [@RFC6749]. If the Authorization process is not complete when this redirect occurs, the Authorization Server returns a response with the `auth_session` parameter. In the event a Wallet receives a response from the Authorization Server which features the `auth_session` parameter, the Wallet MUST make a follow-up request as per (#follow-up-request) to continue the Authorization process.

Reviewer 6: The language around redirection I lifted from RFC 6749.

> * Change Controller: OpenID Foundation Artifact Binding Working Group - openid-specs-ab@lists.openid.net

Author: See Issue #554

   * change algorithm identifiers for credential_signing_alg_values_supported to COSE algorithm values for mdocs
   * Add Credential Request encryption and Zip support
   * Request encryption is now required when response encryption is used

>    * Add the interactive authorization endpoint for presentation during issuance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Add the interactive authorization endpoint to allow for complex authentication and authorization flows where interaction occurs directly with the Wallet, including presentation during issuance
```

   * make type and values for credential_signing_alg_values_supported format specific
   * make type and values for proof_signing_alg_values_supported proof type specific
   * change algorithm identifiers for credential_signing_alg_values_supported to COSE algorithm values for mdocs

>    * add the interactive authorization endpoint to enable presentation during issuance

Author: Done
